FLEX Programmer’s Manual

Technical Systems Consultants, Inc.

COPYRIGHT NOTICE
l — This file is created and distributed by the Flex User's Group,
and includes material which has already been distributed. It is
created with permission from the owner of the original material,
who owns and retains the rights to said material.
2 — It cannot be copied, transmitted, printed, sold, leased or
otherwise communicated in paper, optical, magnetic or electronic
form, in exchange for money or any monetary instrument.
3 — The contents of this file have not been checked for accuracy.
The Flex User's Group makes no statement regarding the contents of
this file, and disclaims any and all liabilities on the use of
such material. It is understood that this material contains
errors, some of which exist in the original material, some of
which do not exist in said original material.
4 — Any transmission, use, copying, display, printing, or reading
of this material implies full understanding and approval of the
above terms.

COPYRIGHT INFORMATION
This entire manual is provided for the personal use and enjoyment of the purchaser. Its
contents are copyrighted by Technical Systems Consultants, Inc., and reproduction, in
whole or in part, by any means is prohibited. Use of this program, or any part thereof, for
any purpose other than single end use by the purchaser is prohibited.

CONTENTS

I. Introduction

1

II. Disk Operating System
DOS Memory Map
User Callable Routines
User Written Commands
Disk Resident Commands
Comments About Commands
Examples of DOS Calls

3
3
8
16
17
18
19

III. File Management System
File Control Blocks
FMS Entry Points
FMS Global Variables
FMS Function Codes
Random Files
Error Numbers

21
22
26
27
28
37
38

IV. Disk Drivers

41

V. Disk Structures
Diskette Initialization
Directory Sectors
Data Sectors
Binary Files
Text Files

43
43
44
44
45
46

VI. Writing Utility Commands
Example Program

47
49

VII. The DOS LINK Utility

51

VIII. Printer Routines
The P Utility

53
54

IX. General Information
Interrupts in FLEX
System Memory Map

57
57
57

Preface

The purpose of the Advanced Programmer's Manual is to provide the
assembler language programmer with the information required to make
effective use of the available system routines and functions.
This
manual applies to all 6800 versions of FLEX. The programmer should keep
this manual close at hand while learning the system. It is organized to
make it convenient as a quick reference guide as well as a thorough
reference manual. The manual is not written for the novice programmer and
assumes the user to have a thorough understanding of assembler language
programming techniques.

Introduction
The FLEX Operating System consists of three main parts: the Disk
Operating System (DOS) which processes commands, the File Management
System (FMS) which manages files on a diskette, and the Utility Command
Set, which are the user-callable commands. The Utility Command Set is
described in the FLEX User's Guide. Details of the Disk Operating System
and File Management System portions of FLEX are described in this manual,
which is intended for the programmer who wishes to write his own commands
or process disk files from his own program.
When debugging programs which use disk files and the File Management
System, the user should take the following precautions:
1.
Write-protect the system diskette by exposing or covering the
write-protect cutout on the diskette. See the FLEX User's Guide for
further details on this operation. This will prevent destruction of the
system disk in case the program starts running wild.
2.
Use an empty scratch diskette as the working diskette to which your
program will write any data files. If something goes wrong and the
diskette is destroyed, no valuable data will have been lost.
3.
Test your program repeatedly, especially with "special cases" of
data input which may not be what the program is expecting. Well-written
programs abort gracefully when detecting errors, not dramatically.
A careful programmer, using the information in this manual, should be
able to make the fullest use of his floppy disk system.

-1-

-2-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
THE DISK OPERATING SYSTEM
The Disk Operating System (DOS) forms the communication link between the
user (via a computer terminal) and the File Management System. All
commands are accepted through DOS. Functions such as file specification
parsing, command argument parsing, terminal I/O, and error reporting are
all handled by DOS. The following sections describe the DOS global
variable storage locations (Memory Map), the DOS user callable
subroutines, and give examples of some possible uses.
DOS MEMORY MAP
The following is a description of those memory locations within the DOS
portion of FLEX which contain information of interest to the programmer.
The user is cautioned against utilizing for his own purposes any
locations documented as being either "reserved" or "system scratch", as
this action may cause destruction of data.
$A080-$A0FF - Line Buffer
The line buffer is a 128 byte area into which characters typed at
the keyboard are placed by the routine INBUF. All characters
entered from the keyboard are placed in this buffer with the
exception of control characters. Characters which have been deleted
by entering the backspace character do not appear in the buffer,
nor does the backspace character itself appear. The carriage return
signalling the end of the keyboard input is, however, put in the
buffer. This buffer is also used to hold the STARTUP file during a
cold start (boot) operation.
$AC00 - TTYSET Backspace Character
This is the character which the routine INBUF will interpret as the
Backspace character. It is user definable through the TTYSET DOS
Utility. Default = $08, a Control-H (ASCII BS).
$AC01 - TTYSET Delete Character
This is the character which the routine INBUF will interpret as the
line cancel or Delete character. It is user definable through the
TTYSET DOS Utility. Default = $18, a control-X (ASCII CAN).
$AC02 - TTYSET End of Line Character
This is the character DOS recognizes as the multiple command per
line separator. It is user definable through the TTYSET Utility.
Default = $3A, a colon (:).
$AC03 - TTYSET Depth Count
This byte determines how many lines DOS will print on a page before
Pausing or issuing Ejects. It may be set by the user with the
TTYSET command. Default = 0.
$AC04 - TTYSET Width Count
This byte tells DOS how many characters to output on each line. If
zero, there is no limit to the number output. This count may be set
by the user using TTYSET. Default = 0.

-3-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AC05 - TTYSET Null Count
This byte informs DOS of the number of null or pad characters to be
output after each carriage return, line feed pair. This count may
be set using TTYSET. Default = 4.
$AC06 - TTYSET Tab Character
This byte defines a tab character which may be used by other
programs, such as the Editor. DOS itself does not make use of the
Tab character. Default = 0, no tab character defined.
$AC07 - TTYSET Backspace Echo Character
This is the character the routine INBUF will echo upon the receipt
of a backspace character. If the backspace echo character is set to
a $08, and the backspace character is also a $08, FLEX will output
a space ($20) prior to the outputting of the backspace echo
character. Default = 0.
$AC08 - TTYSET Eject Count
The Eject Count instructs DOS as to the number of blank lines to be
output after each page. (A page is a set of lines equal in number
to the Depth Count). If this byte is zero, no Eject lines are
output. Default = 0.
$AC09 - TTYSET Pause Control
The Pause byte instructs DOS what action to take after each page is
output. A zero value indicates that the pause feature is enabled; a
non-zero value, pause is disabled. Default = $FF, pause disabled.
$AC0A - TTYSET Escape Character
The Escape character causes DOS to pause after an output line.
Default = $1B, ASCII ESC.
$AC0B - System Drive Number
This is the number of the disk drive from which commands are
loaded. If this byte is $FF, all ready drives will be searched.
Default = drive #0.
$AC0C - Working Drive Number
This is the number of the default disk drive referenced for noncommand files. If this byte is $FF, all ready drives will be
searched. Default = drive #0.
$AC0D - System Scratch
$AC0E-$AC10 - System Date Registers
These three bytes are used to store the system date. It is stored
in binary form with the month in the first byte, followed by the
day, then the year. The year byte contains only the tens and ones
digits.

-4-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AC11 - Last Terminator
This location contains the most recent non-alphanumeric character
encountered in processing the line buffer. See commentary on the
routines NXTCH and CLASS in the section "User-Callable System
Routines".
$AC12-$AC13 - User Command Table Address
The programmer may store into these locations the address of a
command table of his own construction. See the section called
"User-Written Commands" for details. Default = 0000, no user
command table is defined.
$AC14-$AC15 - Line Buffer Pointer
These locations contain the address of the next character in the
Line Buffer to be processed. See documentation of the routines
INBUFF,
NXTCH, GETFIL, GETCHR, and DOCMND in the section "UserCallable System Routines" for instances of its use.
$AC16-$AC17 - Escape Return Register
These locations contain the address to which to jump if a RETURN is
typed while output has been stopped by an Escape Character. See the
FLEX User's Guide, TTYSET, for information on Escape processing.
See also the documentation for the routine PCRLF in the section
called "User-Callable System Routines".
$AC18 - Current Character
This location contains the most recent character taken from the
Line Buffer by the NXTCH routine. See documentation of the NXTCH
routine for additional details.
$AC19 - Previous Character
This location contains the previous character taken from the Line
Buffer by the NXTCH routine. See documentation of the NXTCH routine
for additional details.
$AC1A - Current Line Number
This location contains a count of the number of lines currently on
the page. This value is compared to the Line Count value to
determine if a full page has been printed.
$AC1B-$AC1C - Loader Address Offset
These locations contain the 16-bit bias to be added to the load
address of a routine being loaded from the disk. See documentation
of the System Routine LOAD for details. These locations are also
used as scratch by some system routines.
$AC1D - Transfer Flag
After a program has been loaded from the disk (see LOAD
documentation), this location is non-zero if a transfer address was
found during the loading process. This location is also used as
scratch by some system routines.

-5-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AC1E-$AC1F - Transfer Address
If the Transfer Flag was set non-zero by a load from the disk (see
LOAD documentation), these locations contain the last transfer
address encountered. If the Transfer Flag was set zero by the disk
load, the content of these locations is indeterminate.
$AC20 - Error Type
This location contains the error number returned by several of the
File Management System functions. See the "Error Numbers" section
of this document for an interpretation of the error numbers.
$AC21 - Special I/O Flag
If this byte is non-zero, the PUTCHR routine will ignore the TTYSET
Width feature and also ignore the Escape Character. The routine
RSTRIO clears this byte. Default = 0.
$AC22 - Output Switch
If zero, output performed by the PUTCHR routine is through the
routine OUTCH. If non-zero, the routine OUTCH2 is used. See
documentation of these routines for details.
$AC23 - Input Switch
If zero, input performed by GETCHR is through the routine INCH. If
it is non-zero, the routine INCH2 is used. See documentation of
these routines for details.
$AC24-$AC25 - File Output Address
These bytes contain the address of the File Control Block being
used for file output. If the bytes are zero, no file output is
performed. See PUTCHR description for details. These locations are
set to zero by RSTRIO.
$AC26-$AC27 - File Input Address
These bytes contain the address of the File Control Block being
used for file input. If the bytes are zero, no file input is
performed. The routine RSTRIO clears these bytes. See GETCHR for
details.
$AC28 - Command Flag
This location is non-zero if DOS was called from a user program via
the DOCMND entry point. See documentation of DOCMND for details.
$AC29 - Current Output Column
This location contains a count of the number of characters
currently in the line being output to the terminal. This is
compared to the TTYSET Width Count to determine when to start a new
line. The output of a control character resets this count to zero.
$AC2A - System Scratch

-6-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AC2B-$AC2C - Memory End
These two bytes contain the end of user memory. This location is
set during system boot and may be read by programs requiring this
information.
$AC2D-$AC2E - Error Name Vector
If these bytes are zero, the routine RPTERR will use the file
ERRORS.SYS as the error file. If they are non-zero, they are
assumed to be the address of an ASCII string of characters (in
directory format) of the name of the file to be used as the error
file. See the description of RPTERR for more details.
$AC2F - File Input Echo Flag
If this byte is non-zero (default) and input is being done through
a file, the character input will be echoed to the output channel.
If this byte is zero, the character retrieved will not be echoed.
$AC30-$AC4D - System Scratch
$AC4E-$ACBF - System Constants
$ACC0-$ACD7 - Printer Initialize
This area is reserved for
initialization subroutine.

the

overlay

of

the

system

printer

$ACD8-$ACE3 - Printer Ready Check
This area is reserved for the overlay of the system "check for
printer ready" subroutine.
$ACE4-$ACF7 - Printer Output
This area is reserved for the overlay of the system printer output
character routine. See Printer Routine descriptions for details.
$ACF8-$ACFF - System Scratch

-7-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
USER-CALLABLE SYSTEM ROUTINES
Unless specifically documented otherwise, the content of all registers
should be presumed destroyed by calls to these routines. All routines,
unless otherwise indicated, should be called with a JSR instruction.
$AD00 (COLDS) Coldstart Entry Point
The BOOT program loaded from the disk jumps to this address to
initialize the FLEX system. Both the Disk Operating System (DOS)
portion and the File Management System portion (FMS) of FLEX are
initialized. After initialization, the FLEX title line is printed
and the STARTUP file, if one exists, is loaded and executed. This
entry point is only for use by the BOOT program, not by user
programs. Indiscriminate use of the Coldstart Entry Point by user
programs could result in the destruction of the diskette.
Documentation
of
this
routine
is
included
here
only
for
completeness.
$AD03 (WARMS) Warmstart Entry Point
This is the main re-entry point into DOS from user programs. A JMP
instruction should be used to enter the Warmstart Entry Point.
Here, the system stack and the Escape Return Register are reset. At
this point, the main loop of DOS is entered. The main loop of DOS
checks the Last Terminator location for a TTYSET end-of-line
character. If one is found, it is assumed that there is another
command on the line, and DOS attempts to process it. If no end-ofline is in the Last Terminator location DOS assumes that the
current command line is finished, and looks for a new line to be
input from the keyboard. If, however, DOS was called from a user
program through the DOCMND entry point, control will be returned to
the user program when the end of a command line is reached.
$AD06 (RENTER) DOS Main Loop Re-entry Point
This is a direct entry point into the DOS main loop. None of the
Warmstart initialization is performed. This entry point must be
entered by a JMP instruction. Normally, this entry point is used
internally by DOS and user-written programs should not have need to
use it. For an example of use, see "Printer Driver" section for
details.

-8-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AD09 (INCH) Input Character
$AD0C (INCH2) Input Character
Each of these routines inputs one character from the keyboard,
returning it to the calling program in the A-register. These
routines are alterable only through a custom I/O package or through
the "Auto Block" in the SWTPc FLEX 2.0 version. The GETCHR routine
normally uses INCH but may be instructed to use INCH2 by setting
the "Input Switch" non-zero (see Memory Map). The user's program
may change the jump vector at the INCH address to refer to some
other input routine such as a routine to get a character from paper
tape. The OUTCH2 address should never be altered. The Warmstart
Entry Point resets the INCH jump vector to the same routine as
INCH2 and sets the Input Switch to zero. RSTRIO also resets these
bytes. User programs should use the GETCHR routine, documented
below, rather than calling INCH, because INCH does not check the
TTYSET parameters.
$AD0F (OUTCH) Output Character
$AD12 (OUTCH2) Output Character
On entry to each of these routines, the A-register should contain
the character being output. Both of these routines output the
character in the A-register to an output device. The OUTCH routine
usually does the same as OUTCH2; however, OUTCH may be changed by
programs to refer to some other output routine. For example, OUTCH
may be changed to drive a line printer. These routines are
alterable only through the custom I/O package or the "Auto Block"
in the SWTPc FLEX 2.0 version. The routine PUTCHR, documented
below, calls one of these two routines, depending on the content of
the location "Output Switch" (see Memory Map). The Warmstart Entry
Point resets the OUTCH jump vector to the same routine as OUTCH2,
and sets the Output Switch to zero. RSTRIO also resets these
locations. User routines should use PUTCHR rather than calling
OUTCH or OUTCH2 directly since these latter two do not check the
TTYSET parameters.
$AD15 (GETCHR) Get Character
This routine gets a single character from the keyboard. The
character is returned to the calling program in the A-register. The
Current Line Number location is cleared by a call to GETCHR.
Because this routine honors the TTYSET parameters, its use is
preferred to that of INCH. If the location "Input Switch" is nonzero, the routine INCH2 will be used for input. If zero, the byte
at "File Input Address" is checked. If it is non-zero, the address
at this location is used as a File Control Block of a previously
opened input file and a character is retrieved from the file. If
zero, a character is retrieved via the INCH routine. The X and B
registers are preserved.

-9-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AD18 (PUTCHR) Put Character
This routine outputs a character to a device, honoring all of the
TTYSET parameters. On entry, the character should be in the Aregister. If the "Special I/O Flag" (see Memory Map) is zero, the
column count is checked, and a new line is started if the current
line is full. If an ACIA is being used to control the monitor
terminal, it is checked for a TTYSET Escape Character having been
typed. If so, output will pause at the end of the current line. If
the location "Output Switch" is non-zero, the routine OUTCH2 is
used to send the character. If zero, the location File Output
Address is checked. If it is non-zero the contents of this location
is used as an address of a File Control Block of a previously
opened for write file, and the character is written to the file. If
zero, the routine OUTCH is called to process the character.
Normally, OUTCH sends the character to the terminal. The user
program may, however, change the address portion of the OUTCH entry
point to go to another character output routine. The X and B
registers are preserved.
$AD1B (INBUFF) Input into Line Buffer
This routine inputs a line from the keyboard into the Line Buffer.
The TTYSET Backspace and Delete characters are checked and
processed if encountered. All other control characters except
RETURN and LINE FEED, are ignored. The RETURN is placed in the
buffer at the end of the line. A LINE FEED is entered into the
buffer as a space character but is echoed back to the terminal as a
Carriage Return and Line Feed pair for continuation of the text on
a new line. At most, 128 characters may be entered on the line,
including the final RETURN. If more are entered, only the first 127
are kept, the RETURN being the 128th. On exit, the Line Buffer
Pointer is pointing to the first character in the Line Buffer.
Caution: The command line entered from the keyboard is kept in the
Line Buffer. Calling INBUF from a user program will destroy the
command line, including all unprocessed commands on the same line.
Using INBUF and the Line Buffer for other than DOS commands may
result in unpredictable side-effects.
$AD1E (PSTRNG) Print String
This routine performs a carriage return and line feed and then
prints a string of characters. On entry, the X-register should
contain the address of the first character of the string to be
printed. The string must end with an ASCII EOT character ($04).
This routine honors all of the TTYSET conventions when printing the
string. A carriage return and line feed are output before the
string. The B register is preserved.

-10-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AD21 (CLASS) Classify Character
This routine is used for testing if a character is alphanumeric
(i.e. a letter or a number). On entry, the character should be in
the A-register. If the character is alphanumeric, the routine
returns with the carry flag cleared. If the character is not
alphanumeric, the carry flag is set and the character is stored in
the Last Terminator location. All registers are preserved by this
routine.
$AD24 (PCRLF) Print Carriage Return and Line Feed
In addition to printing a carriage return and line feed, this
routine checks and honors several TTYSET conditions. On entry, this
routine checks for a TTYSET Escape Character having been entered
while the previous line was being printed. If so, the routine waits
for another TTYSET Escape Character or a RETURN to be typed. If a
RETURN was entered, the routine clears the Last Terminator location
so as to ignore any commands remaining in the command line, and
then jumps to the address contained in the Escape Return Register
locations. Unless changed by the user's program, this address is
that of the Warmstart Entry Point. If, instead of a RETURN, another
TTYSET Escape Character was typed, or it wasn't necessary to wait
for one, the Current Line Number is checked. If the last line of
the page has been printed and the TTYSET Pause feature is enabled,
the routine waits for a RETURN or a TTYSET Escape Character, as
above. Note that all pausing is done before the carriage return and
line feed are printed. The carriage return and line feed are now
printed, followed by the number of nulls specified by the TTYSET
Null Count. If the end of the page was encountered on entry to this
routine, an "eject" is performed by issuing additional carriage
return, line feeds, and nulls until the total number of blank lines
is that specified in the TTYSET Eject Count. The X register is
preserved.
$AD27 (NXTCH) Get Next Buffer Character
The character in location Current Character is placed in location
Previous Character. The character to which the Line Buffer Pointer
points is taken from the Line Buffer and saved in the Current
Character location. Multiple spaces are skipped so that a string of
spaces looks no different than a single space. The Line Buffer
Pointer is advanced to point to the next character unless the
character
just fetched was a RETURN or TTYSET End-of-Line
character. Thus, once an end-of-line character or RETURN is
encountered, additional calls to NXTCH will continue to return the
same end-of-line character or RETURN. NXTCH cannot be used to cross
into the next command in the buffer. NXTCH exits through the
routine CLASS, automatically classifying the character. On exit,
the character is in the A-register, the carry is clear if the
character is alphanumeric, and the B-register and X- register are
preserved.

-11-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AD2A (RSTRIO) Restore I/O Vectors
This routine forces the OUTCH jump vector to point to the same
routine as does the OUTCH2 vector. The Output Switch location and
the Input Switch location are set to zero. The INCH jump vector is
reset to point to the same address as the INCH2 vector. Both the
File Input Address and the File Output Address are set to zero. The
A-register and B-register are preserved by this routine.
$AD2D (GETFIL) Get File Specification
On entry to this routine, the X-register must contain the address
of a File Control Block (FCB), and the Line Buffer Pointer must be
pointing to the first character of a file specification in the Line
Buffer. This routine will parse the file specification, storing the
various components in the FCB to which the X-register points. If a
drive number was not specified in the file specification, the
working drive number will be used. On exit, the carry bit will be
clear
if
no
error
was
detected
in
processing
the
file
specification. The carry bit will be set if there was a format
error in the file specification. If no extension was specified in
the file specification, none is stored. The calling program should
set the default extension desired after GETFIL has been called by
using the SETEXT routine. The Line Buffer Pointer is left pointing
to the character immediately beyond the separator, unless the
separator is a carriage return or End of Line character. If an
error was detected, Error number 21 is stored in the error status
byte of the FCB. The X register is preserved with a call to this
routine.
$AD30 (LOAD) File Loader
On entry, the system File Control Block (at $A840) must contain the
name of a file which has been opened for binary reading. This
routine is used to load binary files only, not text files. The file
is read from the disk and stored in memory, normally at the load
addresses specified in the binary file itself. It is possible to
load a binary file into a different memory area by using the Loader
Address Offset locations. The 16-bit value in the Loader Address
Offset locations is added to the addresses read from the binary
file. Any carry generated out of the most significant bit of the
address is lost. The transfer address, if any is encountered, is
not modified by the Loader Address Offset. Note that the setting of
a value in the Loader Address Offset does not modify any part of
the content of the binary file. It does not act as a program relocator in that it does not change any addresses in the program
itself, merely the location of the program in memory. If the file
is to be loaded without an offset, be certain to clear the Loader
Address Offset locations before calling this routine. On exit, the
Transfer Address Flag is zero if no transfer address was found.
This flag is non-zero if a transfer address record was encountered
in the binary file, and the Transfer Address locations contain the
last transfer address encountered. The disk file is closed on exit.
If a disk error is encountered,

-12-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
an error message is issued and control is returned to DOS at the
Warmstart Entry Point.
$AD33 (SETEXT) Set Extension
On entry, the X-register should contain the address of the FCB into
which the default extension is to be stored if there is not an
extension already in the FCB. The A-register, on entry, should
contain a numeric code indicating what the default extension is to
be. The numeric codes are described below. If there is already an
extension in the FCB (possibly stored there by a call to GETFIL),
this routine returns to the calling program immediately. If there
is no extension in the FCB, the extension indicated by the numeric
code in the A-register is placed in the FCB File Extension area.
The legal codes are:
0 - BIN
1 - TXT
2 - CMD
3 - BAS
4 - SYS
5 - BAK
6 - SCR
7 - DAT
8 - BAC
9 - DIR
10- PRT
11- OUT
Any values other than those above are ignored,
returning without storing any extension. The X
preserved in this routine.

the routine
register is

$AD36 (ADDBX) Add B-register to X-register
The content of the B-register is added to the content of the Xregister. The content of the B-register is destroyed on exit.
$AD39 (OUTDEC) Output Decimal Number
On entry, the X-register contains the address of the most
significant byte of a 16-bit (2 byte), unsigned, binary number. The
B-register, on entry, should contain a space suppression flag. The
number will be printed as a decimal number with leading zeroes
suppressed. If the B-register was non-zero on entry, spaces will be
substituted for the leading zeroes. If the B-register is zero on
entry, printing of the number will start with the first non-zero
digit.
$AD3C (OUTHEX) Output Hexadecimal Number
On entry, the X-register contains the address of a single binary
byte. The byte to which the X-register points is printed as 2
hexadecimal digits. The B and X registers are preserved.

-13-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AD3F (RPTERR) Report Error
On entry to this routine, the X-register contains the address of a
File Control Block in which the Error Status Byte is non-zero. The
error code in the FCB is stored by this routine in the Error Type
location. A call to the routine RSTRIO is made and location Error
Vector is checked. If this location is zero, the file ERRORS.SYS is
opened for random read. If this location is non-zero, it is assumed
to be an address pointing to an ASCII string (containing any
necessary null pad characters) of a legal File name plus extension
(string should be 11 characters long). This user provided file is
then opened for random read. The error number is used in a
calculation to determine the record number and offset of the
appropriate error string message in the file. Each error message
string is 63 characters in length, thus allowing 4 messages per
sector. If the string is found, it is printed on the terminal. If
the string is not found (due to too large of error number being
encountered) or if the error file itself was not located on the
disk, the error number is reported to the monitor terminal as part
of the message:
DISK ERROR #nnn
Where "nnn" is the error number being reported. A description of
the error numbers is given elsewhere in this document.
$AD42 (GETHEX) Get Hexadecimal Number
This routine gets a hexadecimal number from the Line Buffer. On
entry, the Line Buffer Pointer must point to the first character of
the number in the Line Buffer. On exit, the carry bit is cleared if
a valid number was found, the B-register is set non-zero, and the
X-register contains the value of the number. The Line Buffer
Pointer is left pointing to the character immediately following the
separator character, unless that character is a carriage return or
End of Line. If the first character examined in the Line Buffer is
a separator character (such as a comma), the carry bit is still
cleared, but the B-register is set to zero indicating that no
actual number was found. In this case, the value returned in the Xregister is zero. If a non-hexadecimal character is found while
processing the number, characters in the Line Buffer are skipped
until a separator character is found, then the routine returns to
the caller with the carry bit set. The number in the Line Buffer
may be of any length, but the value is truncated to between 0 and
$FFFF, inclusive.
$AD45 (OUTADR) Output Hexadecimal Address
On entry, the X register contains the address of the most
significant byte of a 2 byte hex value. The bytes to which the X
register points are printed as 4 hexadecimal digits.

-14-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
$AD48 (INDEC) Input Decimal Number
This routine gets an unsigned decimal number from the Line Buffer.
On entry, the Line Buffer Pointer must point to the first character
of the number in the Line Buffer. On exit, the carry bit is cleared
if a valid number was found, the B-register is set non-zero, and
the X-register contains the binary value of the number. The Line
Buffer Pointer is left pointing as described in the routine GETHEX.
If the first character examined in the buffer is a separator
character (such as a comma), the carry bit is still cleared, but
the B-register is set to zero indicating that no actual number was
found. In this case, the number returned in X is zero. The number
in the Line Buffer may be of any length but the result is truncated
to 16 bit precision.
$AD4B (DOCMND) Call DOS as a Subroutine
This entry point allows a user-written program to pass a command
string to DOS for processing, and have DOS return control to the
user program on completion of the commands. The command string must
be placed in the Line Buffer by the user program, and the Line
Buffer Pointer must be pointing to the first character of the
command string. Note that this will destroy any as yet unprocessed
parameters and commands in the Line Buffer. The command string must
terminate with a RETURN character ($D hex). After the commands have
been processed, DOS will return control to the user's program with
the B-register containing any error code received from the File
Management System. The B-register will be zero if no errors were
detected. Caution: do not use this feature to load programs which
may destroy the user program in memory. An example of a use of this
feature of DOS is that of a program wanting to save a portion of
memory as a binary file on the disk. The program could build a SAVE
command in the Line Buffer with the desired file name and
parameters, and call the DOCMND entry point. On return, the memory
will have been saved on the disk.

-15-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
USER-WRITTEN COMMANDS
The programmer may write his own commands for DOS. These commands may be
either disk-resident as disk files with a CMD extension, or they may be
memory-resident in either RAM or ROM.
MEMORY-RESIDENT COMMANDS :
A memory-resident command is a program, already in memory, to which DOS
will transfer when the proper command is entered from the keyboard. The
command which invokes the program, and the entry-point of the program,
are stored in a User Command Table created by the programmer in memory.
Each entry in the User Command Table has the following format:
FCC
FCB
FDB

'command' (Name that will invoke the program)
0
entry address (This is the entry address of the program)

The entire table is ended by a zero byte. For example, the following
table contains the commands DEBUG (entry at $3000) and PUNT (entry at
$3200):
FCC
FCB
FDB
FCC
FCB
FDB
FCB

'DEBUG' Command Name
0
$3000 Entry address for DEBUG
'PUNT' Command name
0
$3200 Entry address for PUNT
0 End of command table

The address of the User Command Table is made known to DOS by storing it
in the User Command Table Address locations (See Memory Map).
The User Command Table is searched before the disk directory, but after
DOS's own command table is searched. The DOS command table contains
only the GET and MON commands. Therefore, the user may not define his
own GET and MON commands.
Since the User Command Table is searched before the disk directory, the
programmer may have commands with the same name as those on the disk.
However, in this case, the commands on the disk will never be executed
while the User Command Table is known to DOS. The User Command Table
may be deactivated by clearing the User Command Table Address locations.

-16-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
DISK-RESIDENT COMMANDS
A disk-resident command is an assembled program, with a transfer address,
which has been saved on the disk with a CMD extension. The ASMB section
of the FLEX User's Guide describes the way to assign a transfer address
to a program being assembled.
Disk commands, when loaded into memory, may reside anywhere in the User
RAM Area; the address is determined at assembly time by using an ORG
statement. Most commands may be assembled to run in the Utility Command
Space (see Memory Map). Most of the commands supplied with FLEX run in
the Utility Command Space. For this reason, the SAVE command cannot be
used to save information which is in the Utility Command Space or System
FCB space as this information would be destroyed when the SAVE command is
loaded. The SAVE.LOW command is to be used in this case. The SAVE.LOW
command loads into memory at location $100 and allows the saving of
programs in the $A100 region.
The System FCB area is used to load all commands from the disk. Commands
written to run in the Utility Command Space must not overflow into the
System FCB area. Once loaded, the command itself may use the System FCB
area for scratch or as an FCB for its own disk I/O. See the example in
the FMS section.

-17-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
GENERAL COMMENTS ABOUT COMMANDS
User-written commands are entered by a JMP instruction. On completion,
they should return control to DOS by jumping (JMP instruction) to the
Warmstart Entry Point (see Memory Map).
Processing Arguments.
User-written commands are required to process any arguments entered from
the keyboard. The command name and the arguments typed are in the Line
Buffer area (see Memory Map). The Line Buffer Pointer, on entry to the
command, is pointing to the first character of the first argument, if one
exists. If there are no arguments, the Line Buffer Pointer is pointing to
either an end-of-line character or a carriage return. The DOS routines
NXTCH, GETFIL, and GETHEX should be used by the command for processing
the arguments.
Processing Errors.
If the command, while executing, receives an error status from either DOS
or FMS of such a nature that the command must be aborted, the program
should jump to the Warmstart Entry Point of DOS after issuing an
appropriate error message. Similarly, if the command should detect an
error on its own, it should issue a message and return to DOS through the
Warmstart Entry Point.

-18-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
EXAMPLES OF USING DOS ROUTINES
1. Setting up a file spec in the FCB can be done in the following manner.
This example assumes the Line Buffer Pointer is pointing to the first
character of a file specification, and the desired resulting file spec
should default to a TXT extension.
LDX #FCB
JSR GETFIL
BCS ERROR
LDAA #1
JSR SETEXT

Point to FCB
Get file spec into FCB
Report error if one
Set extension code (TXT)
Set the default extension

The user may now open the file for the desired action, since the file
spec is correctly set up in the FCB. Refer to the FMS examples for
opening files.
2. The following examples demonstrate some simple uses of the basic I/O
functions provided by DOS.
LDAA #'A
JSR PUTCHR
LDX
JSR

Setup an ASCII A
Call DOS out character

#STRING Point to string
PSTRNG Print CR & LF + string

The above simple examples are to show the basic mechanism for calling and
using DOS I/O routines.

-19-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide

-20-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
THE FILE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM
The File Management System (FMS), forms the communication link between
the DOS and the actual Disk Hardware. The FMS performs all file
allocation and removal on the disk. All file space is allocated
dynamically, and the space used by files is immediately reusable upon
that file's deletion. The user of the FMS need not be concerned with the
actual location of a file on the disk, or how many sectors it requires.
Communication with the FMS is done through File Control Blocks. These
blocks contain the information about a file, such as its name and what
drive it exists on. All disk I/O performed through FMS is "one character
at a time" I/O. This means that programs need only send or request a
single character at a time while doing file data transfers. In effect,
the disk looks no different than a computer terminal. Files may be opened
for either reading or writing. Any number of files may be opened at any
one time, as long as each one is assigned its own File Control Block.
The FMS is a command language whose commands are represented by various
numbers called Function Codes. Each Function Code tells FMS to perform a
specific function such as open a file for read, or delete a file. In
general, making use of the various functions which the FMS offers, is
quite simple. The index register is made to point to the File Control
Block which is to be used, the Function Code is stored in the first byte
of the File Control Block, and FMS is called as a subroutine (JSR). At no
time does the user ever have to be concerned with where the file is being
located on the disk, how long it is, or where its directory entry is
located. The FMS does all of this automatically.
Since the file structure of FLEX is a linked structure, and the disk
space is allocated dynamically, it is possible for a file to exist on the
disk in a set of non-contiguous sectors. Normally, if a disk has just
been formatted, a file will use consecutive sectors on the disk. As files
are created and deleted, however, the disk may become "fragmented".
Fragmentation results in the sectors on the disk becoming out of order
physically, even though logically they are still all sequential. This is
a characteristic of "linked list" structures and dynamic file allocation
methods. The user need not be concerned with this fragmentation, but
should be aware of the fact that files may exist whose sectors seem to be
spattered all over the disk. The only result of fragmentation is the
slowing down of file read times, because of the increased number of head
seeks necessary while reading the file.

-21-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
THE FILE CONTROL BLOCK (FCB)
The FCB is the heart of the FLEX File Management System (FMS). An FCB is
a 320 byte long block of RAM, in the user's program area, which is used
by programs to communicate with FMS. A separate FCB is needed for each
open file. After a file has been closed, the FCB may be re-used to open
another file or to perform some other disk function such as Delete or
Rename. An FCB may be placed anywhere in the user's program area (except
page zero) that the programmer wishes. The memory reserved for use as an
FCB need not be preset or initialized in any way. Only the parameters
necessary to perform the function need be stored in the FCB; the File
Management System will initialize those areas of the FCB needed for its
use.
In the following description of an FCB, the byte numbers are relative to
the beginning of the FCB; i.e. byte 0 is the first byte of the FCB.
DESCRIPTION OF AN FCB
Byte 0

Function Code

The desired function code must be stored in this byte by the user
before calling FMS to process the FCB. See the section describing
FMS Function Codes.
Byte 1

Error Status Byte

If an error was detected during the processing of a function, FMS
stores the error number in this byte and returns to the user with
the CPU Z-Condition Code bit clear, i.e. a non-zero condition
exists. This may be tested by the BEQ or BNE instruction.
Byte 2 Activity Status
This byte is set by FMS to a "1" if the file is open for read, or
"2" if the file is open for writing. This byte is checked by
several FMS function processors to determine if the requested
operation is legal. A Status Error is returned for illegal
operations.
The next 12 bytes (3-14) comprise the "File Specification" of the file
being referenced by the FCB. A "File Specification" consists of a drive
number, file name, and file extension. Some of the FMS functions do not
require the file name or extension. See the documentation of the
individual function codes for details.
Byte 3 Drive Number
This is the hardware drive number whose diskette contains the file
being referenced. It should be binary 0 to 3.

-22-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
The next 24 bytes (4-27) comprise the "Directory Information" portion of
the FCB. This is the exact same information which is contained in the
diskette directory entry for the file being referenced.
Bytes 4-11 File Name
This is the name of the file being referenced. The name must start
with a letter and contain only letters, digits, hyphens, and/or
underscores. If the name is less than 8 characters long, the
remaining bytes must be zero. The name should be left adjusted in
its field.
Bytes 12-14 Extension
This is the extension of the file name for the file being
referenced. It must start with a letter and contain only letters,
digits, hyphens, and/or underscores. If the extension is less than
3 characters long, the remaining bytes must be zero. The extension
should be left adjusted. Files with null extensions should not be
created.
Byte 15 File Attributes
At present, only the most significant 4 bits are defined in this
byte. These bits are used for the protection status bits and are
assigned as follows:
BIT 7 = Write Protect
BIT 6 = Delete Protect
BIT 5 = Read Protect
BIT 4 = Catalog Protect
Setting these bits to 1 will activate the appropriate protection
status. All undefined bits of this byte should remain 0!
Byte 16

Reserved for future system use

Bytes 17-18

Starting disk address of the file

These two bytes contain the hardware track and sector numbers,
respectively, of the first sector of the file.
Bytes 19-20 Ending disk address of the file
These two byes contain the hardware track
respectively, of the last sector of the file.

and

sector

numbers,

Bytes 21-22 File Size
This is a 16-bit number indicating the number of sectors in the
file.

-23-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Byte 23 File Sector Map Indicator
If this byte is non-zero (usually $02), the file has been created
as a random access file and contains a File Sector Map. See the
description of Random Files for details.
Byte 24 Reserved for future system use
Bytes 25-27 File Creation Date
These three bytes contain the binary date of the files creation.
The first byte is the month, the second is the day, and the third
is the year (only the tens and ones digits).
Bytes 28-29 FCB List Pointer
All FCBs which are open for reading or writing are chained
together. These two bytes contain the memory address of the FCB
List Pointer bytes of the next FCB in the chain. These bytes are
zero if this FCB is the last FCB in the chain. The first FCB in the
chain is pointed to by the FCB Base Pointer. (See Global
Variables).
Bytes 30-31 Current Position
These bytes contain the hardware track and sector numbers,
respectively, of the sector currently in the sector buffer portion
of the FCB. If the file is being written, the sector to which these
bytes point has not yet been written to the diskette; it is still
in the buffer.
Bytes 32-33

Current Record Number

These bytes contain the current logical Record Number of the sector
in the FCB buffer.
Byte 34 Data Index
This byte contains the address of the next data byte to be fetched
from (if reading) or stored into (if writing) the sector buffer.
This address is relative to the beginning of the sector, and is
advanced automatically by the Read/Write Next Byte function. The
user program has no need to manipulate this byte.
Byte 35 Random Index
This byte is used in conjunction with the Get Random Byte From
Sector function to read a specific byte from the sector buffer
without having to sequentially skip over any intervening bytes. The
address of the desired byte, relative to the beginning of the
sector, is stored in Random Index by the user, and the Get Random
Byte From Sector function is issued to FMS. The specified data byte
will be returned in the A-register. A value less than 4 will

-24-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
access one of the linkage bytes in the sector. User data starts at
an index value of 4.
Bytes 36-46 Name Work Buffer
These bytes are used internally by FMS as temporary storage for a
file name. These locations are not for use by a user program.
Bytes 47-49 Current Directory Address
If the FCB is being used to process directory information with the
Get/Put Information Record functions, these three bytes contain the
track number, sector number, and starting data index of the
directory entry whose content is in the Directory Information
portion of the FCB. The values in these three bytes are updated
automatically by the Get Information Record function.
Bytes 50-52

First Deleted Directory Pointer

These bytes are used internally by FMS when looking for a free
entry in the directory to which to assign the name of a new file.
Bytes 53-63

Scratch Bytes

These are the bytes into which the user stores the new name and
extension of a file being renamed. The new name is formatted the
same as described above under File Name and File Extension.
Byte 59 Space Compression Flag
If a file is open for read or write, this byte indicates if space
compression is being performed. A value of zero indicates that
space compression is to be done when reading or writing the data.
This is the value that is stored by the Open for Read and Open for
Write functions. A value of $FF indicates that no space compression
is to be done. This value is what the user must store in this byte,
after opening the file, if space compression is not desired. (Such
as for binary files). A positive non-zero value in this byte
indicates that space compression is currently in progress; the
value being a count of the number of spaces processed thus far.
(Note that although this byte overlaps the Scratch Bytes described
above, there is no conflict since the Space Compression Flag is
used only when a file is open, and the Scratch Bytes are used only
by Rename, which requires that the file be closed). In general,
this byte should be 0 while working with text type files, and $FF
for binary files.
Bytes 64-319 Sector Buffer
These bytes contain the data contained in the sector being read or
written. The first four bytes of the sector are used by the system.
The remaining 252 are used for data storage.

-25-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
FILE MANAGEMENT SYSTEM - Entry Points
$B400 - FMS Initialization
This entry point is used by the DOS portion of FLEX to initialize
the File Management System after a coldstart. There should be no
need for a user-written program to use this entry point. Executing
an FMS Initialization at the wrong time may result in the
destruction of data files, necessitating a re-initialization of the
diskette.
$B403 - FMS Close
This entry point is used by the DOS portion of FLEX at the end of
each command line to close any files left open by the command
processor. User-written programs may also use this entry point to
close all open files; however, if an error is detected in trying to
close a file, any remaining files will not be closed. Thus the
programmer is cautioned against using this routine as a substitute
for the good programming practice of closing files individually.
There are no arguments to this routine. It is entered by a JSR
instruction as though it were a subroutine. On exit, the CPU ZCondition code is set if no error was detected (i.e. a "zero"
condition exists). If an error was detected, the CPU Z-Condition
code bit is clear and the X-register contains the address of the
FCB causing the error.
$B406 - FMS Call
This entry point is used for all other calls to the File Management
System. A function code is stored in the Function Code byte of the
FCB, the address of the FCB is put in the X-register, and this
entry point is called by a JSR instruction. The function codes are
documented elsewhere in this document. On exit from this entry
point, the CPU Z-Condition code bit is set if no error was detected
in processing the function. This bit may be tested with a BEQ or
BNE instruction. If an error was detected, the CPU Z-Condition code
bit is cleared and the Error Status byte in the FCB contains the
error number. Under all circumstances, the address of the FCB is
still in the X-register on exit from this entry point. Some of the
functions require additional parameters in the A and/or Bregisters. See the documentation of the Function codes for details.
The X and B registers are always preserved with a call to FMS.

-26-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
GLOBAL VARIABLES
This section describes those variables within the File Management System
which may be of interest to the programmer. Any other locations in the
FMS area should not be used for data storage by user programs.
$B409 - $B40A

FCB Base Pointer

These locations contain the address of the FCB List Pointer bytes
of the first FCB in the chain of open files. The address in these
locations is managed by FMS and the programmer should not store any
values in these locations. A user program may, however, want to
chain through the FCBs of the open files for some reason, and the
address stored in these locations is the proper starting point.
Remember that the address is that of the FCB List Pointer locations
in the FCB, not the first word of the FCB. A value of zero in these
locations indicates that there are no open files.
$B40B - $B40C

Current FCB Address

These locations contain the address of the last FCB processed by
the File Management System. The address is that of the first word
of the FCB.
$B435 Verify Flag
A non-zero value in this location indicates that FMS will check
each sector written for errors immediately after writing it. A zero
value indicates that no error checking on writes is to be
performed. The default value is "non-zero".

-27-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
FMS FUNCTION CODES
The FLEX File Management System is utilized by the user through function
codes. The proper function code number is placed, by the user, in the
Function Code byte of the File Control Block (FCB) before calling FMS
(Byte 0). FMS should be called by a JSR to the "FMS Call" entry. On entry
to FMS, the X-register should contain the address of the FCB. On exit
from FMS, the CPU Z-Condition code bit will be clear if an error was
detected while processing the function. This bit may be tested by the BNE
and BEQ instructions. Note: In the following examples, the line "JSR FMS"
is referencing the FMS Call entry at $B406.
Function 0 - Read/Write Next Byte/Character
If the file is open for reading, the next byte is fetched from the
file and returned to the calling program in the A-register. If the
file is open for writing, the content of the A-register on entry is
placed in the buffer as the next byte to be written to the file.
The Compression Mode Flag must contain the proper value for
automatic
space compression to take place, if desired (see
Description of the FCB, Compression Mode Flag for details). On
exit, this function code remains unchanged in the Function Code
byte of the FCB; thus, consecutive read/writes may be performed
without having to repeatedly store the function code. When reading,
an End-of-File error is returned when all data in the file has been
read. When the current sector being read is empty, the next sector
in the file is prepared for processing automatically, without any
action being required of the user. Similarly, when writing, full
sectors are automatically written to the disk without user
intervention.
Example:
If reading LDX
#FCB
Point to the FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR
Check for error
The character read is now in A.
If writing LDAA CHAR
Get the character
LDX
#FCB
Point to the FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR
Check for errors
The character in A has been written

-28-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 1 - Open for Read
The file specified in the FCB is opened for read-only access. If
the file cannot be found, an error is returned. The only parts of
the FCB which must be preset by the programmer before issuing this
function are the file specification parts (drive number, file name,
and file extension) and the function code. The remaining parts of
the FCB will be initialized by the Open process. The Open process
sets the File Compression Mode Flag to zero, indicating a text
file. If the file is binary, the programmer should set the File
Compression Mode Flag to $FF, after opening the file, to disable
the space compression feature. On exit from FMS, after opening a
file, the function code in the FCB is automatically set to zero
(Read/Write Next Byte Function) in anticipation of I/O on the file.
Example:
LDX
#FCB
Point to the FCB
[ Set up file spec in FCB ]
LDAA #1
Set open function code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR
Check for errors
The file is now open for text reading
To set for binary - continue with the following
LDAA #$FF
Set FF for sup. flag
STAA 59,X
Store in suppression flag
Function 2 - Open for Write
This is the same as Function 1, Open for Read, except that the file
must not already exist in the diskette directory, and it is opened
for write-only access. A file opened for write may not be read
unless it is first closed and then re-opened for read-only. The
space compression flag should be treated the same as described in
"Open for Read". A file is normally opened as a sequential file but
may be created as a random file by setting the FCB location File
Sector Map byte non-zero immediately following an open for write
operation. Refer to the section on Random Files for more details.
The file will be created on the drive specified unless the drive
spec is $FF in which case the file will be created on the first
drive found to be ready.
Example:
LDX
#FCB
Point to FCB
[ Setup file spec in FCB ]
LDAA #2
Setup open for write code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
File is now open for text write.
For binary write, follow example in Read open.

-29-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 3 - Open for Update
This function opens the file for both read and write. The file must
not be open and must exist on the specified drive. If the drive
spec is $FF, all drives will be searched. Once the file has been
opened for update, four operations may be performed on it; 1.
sequential read, 2. random read, 3. random write, and 4. close
file. Note that it is not possible to do sequential writes to a
file open for update. This implies that it is not possible to
increase the size of a file which is open for update.
Function 4 - Close File
If the file was opened for reading, a close merely removes the FCB
from the chain of open files. If the file was opened for writing,
any data remaining in the buffer is first written to the disk,
padding with zeroes if necessary, to fill out the sector. If a file
was opened for writing but never written upon, the name of the file
is removed from the diskette directory since the file contains no
data.
Example:
LDX
#FCB
Point to FCB
LDAA #4
Setup close code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
File has now been closed.
Function 5 - Rewind File
Only files which have been opened for read may be rewound. On exit
from FMS, the function code in the FCB is set to zero, anticipating
a read operation on the file. If the programmer wishes to rewind a
file which is open for writing so that it may now be read, the file
must first be closed, then re-opened for reading.
Example:
Assuming the file is open for read:
LDX
#FCB
Point to FCB
LDAA #5
Setup rewind code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
File is now rewound & ready for read

-30-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 6 - Open Directory
This function opens the directory on the diskette for access by a
program. The FCB used for this function must not already be open
for use by a file. On entry, the only information which must be
preset in the FCB is the drive number; no file name is required.
The directory entries are read by using the Get Information Record
function. The Put Information Record function is used to write a
directory entry. The normal Read/Write Next Byte function will not
function correctly on an FCB which is opened for directory access.
It is not necessary to close an FCB which has been opened for
directory access after the directory manipulation is finished. The
user should normally not need to access the directory.
Function 7 - Get Information Record
This function should only be issued on an FCB which has been opened
with the Open Directory function. Each time the Get Information
Record function is issued, the next directory entry will be loaded
into the Directory Information area of the FCB (see Description of
the FCB for details of the format of a directory entry). All
directory entries, including deleted and unused entries are read
when using this function. After an entry has been read, the FCB is
said to "point" to the directory entry just read; the Current
Directory Address bytes in the FCB refer to the entry just read. An
End-of-File error is returned when the end of the directory is
reached.
Example:
To get the 3rd directory entry LDX
#FCB
Point to FCB
LDAA DRIVE Get the drive number
STAA 3,X
Store in the FCB
LDAA #6
Setup open dir code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
LDAB #3
Set counter to 3
LOOP LDAA #7
Setup get rec code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
DECB
Decrement the counter
BNE
LOOP
Repeat til finished
The 3rd entry is now in the FCB

-31-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 8 - Put Information Record
This function should only be issued on an FCB which has been opened
with the Open Directory function. The directory information is
copied from the Directory Information portion of the FCB into the
directory entry to which the FCB currently points. The directory
sector just updated is then re-written automatically on the
diskette to ensure that the directory is up-to-date. A user program
should normally never have to write into a directory. Careless use
of this function can lead to the destruction of data files,
necessitating a re-initialization of the diskette.
Function 9 - Read Single Sector
This function is a low-level interface directly to the disk driver
which permits the reading of a single sector, to which the Current
Position bytes of the FCB point, into the Sector Buffer area of the
FCB. This function is normally used internally within FLEX and a
user program should never need to use it. The Read/Write Next Byte
function should be used instead, whenever possible. Extreme care
should be taken when using this function since it does not conform
to the usual conventions to which most of the other FLEX functions
adhere.
Example:
LDX
#FCB
Point to FCB
LDAA TRACK Get track number
STAA 30,X
Set current track
LDAA SECTOR Get sector number
STAA 31,X
Set current sector
LDAA #9
Setup function code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
The sector is now in the FCB
Function 10 ($0A hex) - Write Single Sector
This function, like the Read Single Sector function, is a low-level
interface directly to the disk driver which permits the writing of
a single sector. As such, it requires extreme care in its use. This
function is normally used internally by FLEX, and a user program
should never need to use it. The Read/Write Next Byte function
should be used whenever possible. Careless use of the Write Single
Sector
Function
may
result
in
the
destruction
of
data,
necessitating the re-initialization of the diskette. The disk
address being written is taken from the Current Position bytes of
the FCB; the data is taken from the FCB Sector Buffer. This
function honors the Verify Flag (see Global Variables section for a
description of the Verify Flag), and will check the sector after
writing it if directed to do so by the Verify Flag.

-32-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 11 ($0B hex) - Reserved for future system use
Function 12 ($0C hex) - Delete File
This function deletes the file whose specification is in the FCB
(drive numbers, file name, and extension). The sectors used by the
file are released to the system for re-use. The file should not be
open when this function is issued. The file specification in the
FCB is altered during the delete process.
Example:
LDX
#FCB
Point to FCB
[ setup file spec in FCB ]
LDAA #12
Setup function code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check errors
File has now been deleted
Function 13 ($0D hex) - Rename File
On entry, the file must not be open, the old name must be in the
File Specification area of the FCB, and the new name and extension
must be in the Scratch Bytes area of the FCB. The file whose
specification is in the FCB is renamed to the name and extension
stored in the FCB Scratch Bytes area. Both the new name and the new
extension must be specified; neither the name nor the extension can
be defaulted.
Example:
LDX #FCB Point to FCB
[ setup both file specs in FCB ]
LDAA #13 Setup function code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR FMS
Call FMS
BNE ERROR Check for errors
File has been renamed
Function 14 ($0E hex) - Reserved for future system use.

-33-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 15 ($0F hex) - Next Sequential Sector
On entry the file should be open for either reading or writing (not
update). If the file is open for reading, this function code will
cause all of the remaining (yet unread) data bytes in the current
sector to be skipped, and the data pointer will be positioned at
the first data byte of the next sequential sector of the file. If
the file is open for write, this operation will cause the remainder
of the current sector to be zero filled and written out to the
disk. The next character written to that file will be placed in the
first available data location in the next sequential sector. It
should be noted that all calls to this function code will be
ignored unless at least one byte of data has either been written or
read from the current sector.
Function 16 ($10 hex) - Open System Information Record
On entry, only the drive number need be specified in the FCB; there
is no file name associated with this function. The FCB must not be
open for use by a file. This function accesses the System
Information Record for the diskette whose drive number is in the
FCB. There are no separate functions for reading or changing this
sector. All references to the data contained in the System
Information Record must be made by manipulating the Sector Buffer
directly. This function is used internally within FLEX; there
should be no need for a user-written program to change the System
Information Record. Doing so may result in the destruction of data,
necessitating the re-initialization of the diskette. There is no
need to close the FCB when finished.
Function 17 ($11 hex) - Get Random Byte From Sector
On entry, the file should be open for reading or update. Also, the
desired byte's number should be stored in the Random Index byte of
the FCB. This byte number is relative to the beginning of the
sector buffer. On exit, the byte whose number is stored in the
Random Index is returned to the calling program in the A-register.
The Random Index should not be less than 4 since there is no user
data in the first four bytes of the sector.
Example:
To read the 54th data byte of the current sector LDX
#FCB
Point to the FCB
LDAA #54+4 Set to item + 4
STAA 35,X
Put it in random index
LDAA #17
Setup function code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
Character is now in acc. A

-34-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 18 ($12 hex) - Put Random Byte in Sector
The file must be open for update. This function is similar to Get
Random Byte except the character in the A accumulator is written
into the sector at the data location specified by Random Index of
the FCB. The Random Index should not be less than 4 since only
system data resides in the first 4 bytes of the sector.
Example:
To write into the 54th data byte of the current sectorLDX
#FCB
Point to the FCB
LDAA #54+4 Set to item + 4
STAA 35,X
Put it in Random Index
LDAA #18
Setup Function Code
STAA 0,X
Store in FCB
LDAA CHAR
Get character to be written
JSR
FMS
Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
Character has been written
Function 19 ($13 hex) - Reserved for future system use
Function 20 ($14 hex) - Find Next Drive
This function is used to find the next online drive which is in the
“ready" state. Due to hardware limitations, the minifloppy versions
of FLEX may perform this command differently than the full size
floppy versions. The functioning of the full size versions is as
follows. If the drive number in the FCB is hex FF, the search for
drives will start with drive 0. If the drive number is 0, 1, or 2,
the search will start with drive 1, 2, or 3 respectively. If a
ready drive is found, its drive number will be returned in the
drive number byte of the FCB and the zero bit in the condition
codes will be set on return. If no ready drive is found, the zero
bit will be cleared (implying a Not equal to Zero condition) and
error #16 (Drives Not Ready) will be set.
The minifloppy versions function as follows. If called with a Drive
Number in the FCB of hex FF, the function will return with 0 as the
drive number in the FCB. If called with a 0, it will return with
the drive number set to 1. In both cases the zero bit in the
condition codes would be set on return. If called with a drive
number of 1 or higher, the drive number is left unchanged, the zero
bit is cleared (implying a Not equal to Zero condition), and error
#16 (Drives Not Ready) is set.

-35-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Function 21 ($15 hex) - Position to Record N
This is one of the 2 function codes provided for random file
accessing by sector. The desired record number to be accessed
should be stored in the FCB location Current Record Number (a 16
bit binary value). The file must be open for read or update before
using this function code. The first data record of a file is record
number one. Positioning to record 0 will read in the first sector
of the File Sector Map. After a successful Position operation, the
first character read with a sequential read will be the first data
byte of the specified record. An attempt to position to a
nonexistent record will cause an error. For more information on
random files, see the section titled 'Random Files'.
Example:
To position to record #6 LDX
#FCB Point to the FCB
LDAA #6 Set position
STAA 33,X Put in FCB
CLR
32,X Set M.S.B to 0
LDAA #21 Setup Function Code
STAA 0,X Store in FCB
JSR
FMS Call FMS
BNE
ERROR Check for errors
Record ready to be read
Function 22 ($16 hex) - Backup One Record
This is also used for random file accessing. This function takes
the Current Record Number in the FCB and decrements it by one. A
Position to the new record is performed. This has the effect of
back spacing one full record. For example, if the Current Record
Number is 16 and the Backup One Record function is performed, the
file would be positioned to read the first byte of record #15. The
file must be open for read or update before this function may be
used. See 'Random Files' section for more details.

-36-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
RANDOM FILES
The FLEX disk operating system supports random files. The random access
technique allows access by record number of a file and can reach any
specified sector in a file, no matter how large it is, in a maximum of
two disk reads. With a small calculation using the number of data bytes
in a sector (252), the user may also easily reach the Nth character of a
file using the same mechanism.
Not all files may be accessed in a random manner. It is necessary to
create the file as a random file. The default creation mode is sequential
and is what all of the standard FLEX Utilities work with. The only random
file in a standard FLEX system is the ERRORS.SYS file. FLEX uses a random
access technique when reporting error messages. A file which has been
created as a random access file may read either randomly or sequentially.
A sequential file may only be read sequentially.
To create a random file, the normal procedure for opening a file for
write should be used. Immediately following a successful open, set the
File Sector Map location of the FCB to any non-zero value and proceed
with the file's creation. It only makes sense to create text type files
in the random mode. As the file is built, the system creates a File
Sector Map. This File Sector Map (FSM) is a map or directory which tells
the system where each record (sector) of the file is located on the disk.
The FSM is always two sectors in length and is assigned record number 0
in the file. This implies that a data file requiring 5 sectors for the
data will actually be 7 sectors in length. The user has no need for the
FSM sectors and they are automatically skipped when opening a file for
read. The FMS uses them for the Position and Backup function code
operations.
The directory information of a file states whether or not a file is a
random file. If the File Sector Map byte is non-zero, the file is random,
otherwise it is sequential only. It should be noted that random files can
be Copied from one disk to another without losing its random properties,
but it can not be appended to another file.

-37-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
FLEX ERROR NUMBERS
1 - ILLEGAL FMS FUNCTION CODE ENCOUNTERED
FMS was called with a function code in the Function Code byte of
the FCB that was too large or illegal.
2 - THE REQUESTED FILE IS IN USE
An Open for Read, Update, or Write function was issued on an FCB
that is already open.
3 - THE FILE SPECIFIED ALREADY EXISTS
a. An Open for Write was issued
specification for a file already
directory.

on an FCB containing the
existing in the diskette

b. A Rename function was issued specifying a new name that was the
same as the name of a file already existing in the diskette
directory.
4 - THE SPECIFIED FILE COULD NOT BE FOUND
An Open for Read or Update, a Rename, or a Delete function was
requested on an FCB containing the file specification for a file
which does not exist in the diskette directory.
5 - SYSTEM DIRECTORY ERROR - REBOOT SYSTEM
Reserved for future system use.
6 - THE SYSTEM DIRECTORY SPACE IS FULL
This error should never occur since the directory space is self
expanding, and can never be filled. Only disk space can be filled
(error #7).
7 - ALL AVAILABLE DISK SPACE HAS BEEN USED
All of the available space on the diskette has been used up by
files. If this error is returned by FMS, the last character sent to
be written to a file did not actually get written.
8 - READ PAST END OF FILE
A read operation on a file encountered an end-of-file. All of the
data in the file has been processed. This error will also be
returned when reading a directory with the Get Information Record
function when the end of the directory is reached.
9 - DISK FILE READ ERROR
A checksum error was encountered by the hardware in attempting to
read a sector. DOS has already attempted to re-read the failing
sector several times, without success, before reporting the error.
This error may also result from illegal track and sector addresses
being put in the FCB.

-38-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
10 - DISK FILE WRITE ERROR
A checksum error was detected by the hardware in attempting to
write a sector. DOS has already tried several times, without
success, to re-write the failing sector before reporting the error.
This error may also result from illegal track and sector numbers
being put in the FCB. A write-error status may also be returned if
a read error was detected by DOS in attempting to update the
diskette directory.
11 - THE FILE OR DISK IS WRITE PROTECTED
An attempt was made to write on a diskette which has been writeprotected by use of the write-enable cutout in the diskette or to a
file which has the write protect bit set.
12 - THE FILE IS PROTECTED - FILE NOT DELETED
The file attempted to be deleted has its delete protect bit set and
can not be deleted.
13 - ILLEGAL FILE CONTROL BLOCK SPECIFIED
An attempt was made to access an FCB from the open FCB chain, but
it was not in the chain.
14 - ILLEGAL DISK ADDRESS ENCOUNTERED
Reserved for future system use.
15 - AN ILLEGAL DRIVE NUMBER WAS SPECIFIED
Reserved for future system use.
16 - DRIVES NOT READY
The drive does not have a diskette in it or the door is open. This
message cannot be issued for mini floppys since there is no means
of detecting such a state.
17 - THE FILE IS PROTECTED - ACCESS DENIED
Reserved for future system use.
18 - SYSTEM FILE STATUS ERROR
a. A read or Rewind was attempted on a file which was closed, or
open for write access.
b. A write was attempted on a file which was closed, or open for
read access.
19 - FMS DATA INDEX RANGE ERROR
The Get Random Byte from Sector function was issued with a Random
Byte number greater than 255.
20 - FMS INACTIVE - REBOOT SYSTEM
Reserved for future system use.
21 - ILLEGAL FILE SPECIFICATION
A format error was detected in a file name specification. The name
must begin with a letter and contain only letters, digits, hyphens,
and/or underscores. Similarly with file extensions. File names are
limited to 8 characters, extensions to 3.

-39-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
22 - SYSTEM FILE CLOSE ERROR
Reserved for future system use.
23 - SECTOR MAP OVERFLOW - DISK TOO SEGMENTED
An attempt was made to create a very large random access file on a
disk which is very segmented. All record information could not fit
in the 2 sectors of the File Sector Map. Recreating the file on a
new diskette will solve the problem.
24 - NON-EXISTENT RECORD NUMBER SPECIFIED
A record number larger than the last record number of the file was
specified in a random position access.
25 - RECORD NUMBER MATCH ERROR - FILE DAMAGED
The record located by the FMS random search is not the correct
record. The file is probably damaged.
26 - COMMAND SYNTAX ERROR - RETYPE COMMAND
The command line just typed has a syntax error.
27 - THAT COMMAND IS NOT ALLOWED WHILE PRINTING
The command just entered is not allowed to operate while the system
printer spooler is activated.
28 - WRONG HARDWARE CONFIGURATION
This error usually implies insufficient memory installed in the
computer for a particular function or trying to use the printer
spooler without the hardware timer board installed.

-40-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
DISK DRIVERS
The following information is for those users who wish to write their own
disk drivers to interface with some other disk configuration than is
supplied by the vendor. Neither the vendor nor Technical Systems
Consultants is in a position to write disk drivers for other
configurations, nor do these companies guarantee the proper functioning
of FLEX with user-written drivers.
The disk drivers are the interface routines between FLEX and the hardware
driving the floppy disks themselves. The drivers released with the FLEX
System are designed to interface with the Western Digital 1771 Floppy
Disk Formatter/Controller chip.
The disk drivers are located in RAM at addresses $BE80 - $BFFF. All disk
functions are vectored jumps at the beginning of this area. The disk
drivers need not handle retries in case of errors; FLEX will call them as
needed. If an error is detected, the routines should exit with the disk
hardware status in the B-register and the CPU Z-Condition code bit clear
(issue a TST B before returning to accomplish this). FLEX expects status
responses as produced by the Western Digital 1771 Controller. These
statuses must be simulated if some other controller is used. All drivers
should return with the X-register unchanged.
All routines are entered
with a JSR instruction.
The following set of routines is common to all versions of 6800 FLEX. The
SWTPc FLEX 2.0 version has only these routines, while some versions have
more as specified elsewhere.
$BE80 - Read
Entry - (X) = FCB Sector Buffer Address
(A) = Track Number
(B) = Sector Number
The sector referenced by the track and sector numbers is to be read
into the Sector Buffer area of the indicated FCB.
$BE83 - Write
Entry - (X) = FCB Sector Buffer Address
(A) = Track Number
(B) = Sector Number
The content of the Sector Buffer area of the indicated FCB is to be
written to the sector referenced by the track and sector numbers.
$BE86 - Verify
Entry - (No parameters)
The sector just written is to be verified to determine if there are
CRC errors.
$BE89 - Restore
Entry - (X) = FCB Address
Exit - CC, NE, & B=$B if write protected
CS, NE, & B=$F if no drive
A Restore Operation (also known as a Seek to Track 00) is to be

-41-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
performed on the drive whose number is in the FCB.
$BE8C - Drive Select
Entry - (X) = FCB Address
The drive whose number is in the FCB is to be selected.
$BE8F - Check Drive Ready
Entry - (X) = FCB Address
Exit - NE & CS if drive not ready
EQ & CC if drive ready
This routine is setup for FLEX systems where it is possible to
check the drive whose number is in the FCB for a ready status after
selecting that drive and delaying long enough for the drive motor
to come up to speed (approx. 2 seconds). In the FLEX 2.0 versions
for SWTPc and SSB, this is not possible due to hardware
limitations. In these cases, this routine should not delay and
should simply return a drive ready status if the drive number in
the FCB is 0 or 1 or a drive not ready status for any other drive
number.
$BE92 - Quick Check Drive Ready
This routine is the same as Drive Check Ready except the 2 second
delay is not done. This assumes the drive motor is already up to
speed. For FLEX 2.0 versions, there is no difference in the two and
this routine can simply be a jump to the Check Drive Ready routine.

-42-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
Diskette Initialization
The NEWDISK command is used to "initialize" a diskette for use by the
FLEX Operating System. The initialization process writes the necessary
track and sector addresses in the sectors of a "soft-sectored" diskette
such as is used by FLEX. In addition, the initialization process links
together all of the sectors on the diskette into a chain of available
sectors.
The first track on the diskette, track 0, is special. None of the sectors
on track 0 are available for data files, they are reserved for use by the
FLEX system. The first two sectors contain a "boot" program which is
loaded by the "D" command of the SWTBUG monitor or by whatever comparable
ROM based bootstrap is in use. The boot program, once loaded, then loads
FLEX from the diskette. Another sector on track 0 is the System
Information Record. This sector contains the track and sector addresses
of the beginning and ending sectors of the chain of free sectors, those
available for data files. The rest of track 0 is used for the directory
of file names.
After initialization, the free tracks on the diskette have a common
format. The first two bytes of each sector contain the track and sector
number of the next sector in the chain. The next two bytes are used to
store the logical record number of the sector in the file. The remaining
252 bytes are zero. Initially, all record number bytes are zero. When
data is stored in a file, the two linkage bytes at the beginning of each
sector are modified to point to the next sector in the file, not the next
sector in the free chain. The sectors in the diskette directory on track
0 also have linkage bytes similar to those in the free chain and data
files.
A FLEX diskette is not initialized in the strict IBM standard format. In
the standard format, the sectors on the diskette should be physically in
the same order as they are logically, i.e. sector 2 should follow sector
1, 3 follow 2, etc. On a FLEX diskette, the sectors are interleaved so
that there is time, after having read one sector, to process the data and
request the next sector before it has passed under the head. If the
sectors are physically adjacent, the processing time must be very short.
The interleaving of the sectors allows more time for processing the data.
The phenomena of missing a sector because of long processing times is
called "missing revolutions", and results in very slow running time for
programs. The FLEX format reduces the number of missed revolutions, thus
speeding up programs.

-43-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
DESCRIPTION OF A DIRECTORY SECTOR
Each sector in the directory portion of a FLEX diskette contains 10
directory entries. Each entry refers to one file on the diskette. In each
sector, the first four bytes contain the sector linkage information and
the next 12 bytes are not used. When reading information from the
directory using the FMS Get Information Record function, these 16 bytes
are skipped automatically as each sector is read; the user need not be
concerned with them.
Each entry in the directory contains the exact same information that is
stored in the FCB bytes 4-27. See the description of the File Control
Block (FCB) for more details.
A directory entry which has never been used has a zero in the first byte
of the file name. A directory entry which has been deleted has the
leftmost bit of the name set (i.e. the first byte of the name is
negative).

DESCRIPTION OF A DATA SECTOR
Every sector on a FLEX diskette (except the two BOOT sectors) has the
following format:
Bytes 0-1 Link to the next sector
Bytes 2-3 File Logical Record Number
Bytes 4-255 Data
If a file occupies more than one sector, the "link to the next sector"
portion contains the track and sector numbers, respectively, of the next
sector in the file. These bytes are zero in the last sector of a file,
indicating that no more data follows (an "end-of-file" condition). The
user should never manually change the linkage bytes of a sector. These
bytes are automatically managed by FMS. In fact, the user need not be
concerned at all with sector linkage information.

-44-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
DESCRIPTION OF A BINARY FILE
A FLEX binary file may contain anything as data; all ASCII characters are
allowed. Each binary file is composed of one or more binary records.
There may be more than one binary record in a single sector.
A binary record looks as follows: (byte numbers are relative to the start
of the record, not the beginning of a sector)
Byte 0 Start of record indicator ($02, the ASCII STX)
Byte 1 Most significant byte of the load address
Byte 2 Least significant byte of the load address
Byte 3 Number of data bytes in the record
Byte 4-n The binary data in the record
The load address portion of a binary record contains the address where
the data resided when it was written to the file with the FLEX SAVE
command. When the file is loaded for execution or use, it will be put in
the same memory areas from which it was SAVED.
A binary file may also contain an optional transfer address record. This
record gives the address in memory of the entry point of a binary
program. The format of a transfer address record is as follows:
Byte 0 Transfer Address Indicator ($16, ASCII ACK)
Byte 1 Most significant byte of the transfer address
Byte 2 Least significant byte of the transfer address
If a file contains more than one transfer address record (caused by
appending binary files which contain transfer addresses), the last one
encountered by the load process is the one that is used, the others are
ignored.
When reading or writing a binary file through the File Management System
from a user program, the calling program must process the record
indicator bytes and load addresses itself; FLEX does not supply or
process this information for the user.

-45-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
DESCRIPTION OF A TEXT FILE
A text file (also called an "ASCII file" or "coded file") contains only
printable
ASCII
characters plus a few special-purpose control
characters. There is no "load address" associated with a FLEX text file
as there is with FLEX binary files. It is the responsibility of the
program which is reading the text file to put the data where it belongs.
The only control character which FLEX recognizes and processes in a FLEX
text file are:
$0D (ASCII CR or RETURN)
This character is used to mark the end of a line or record in the
file.
$00 (ASCII NULL)
Ignored by FLEX; if encountered in the file, it is not returned to
the calling program.
$18 (ASCII CANCEL)
Ignored by FLEX; if encountered in the file, it is not returned to
the calling program.
$09 (ASCII HT or HORIZONTAL TAB)
This is a flag character which indicates that a string of spaces
has been removed from the file as a space-saving measure. The next
byte following the flag character is a count of the number of space
removed (2-127). The calling program sees neither the flag
character nor the count character. The proper number of spaces are
returned to the user program as successive characters are requested
by the Read Next Byte function. When writing a file, the spaces are
automatically deleted as the user program sends them to the File
Management System using the Write Next Byte function. The data
compression is, therefore, transparent to the calling program.(The
above discussion is only valid if the file is open for Text
operations. If open for Binary, the compression flag and count get
passed exactly as they appear in the file.)

-46-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
WRITING UTILITY COMMANDS
Utility commands are best prepared by the use of an assembler. FLEX
reserves a block of memory in which medium size utilities may be placed.
This memory starts at hex location $A100 and extends through location
$A6FF. The system FCB at location $A840 may also be used in user written
utilities for either FCB space or temporary storage. No actual code
should reside in this FCB space since it would interfere with the loading
of the utility (FLEX is using that FCB while loading utilities).
An example will be given to demonstrate some of the conventions and
techniques which should be used when writing utilities. The example,
which can be found on the following pages, is a simple text file listing
utility. Its syntax is:
LIST,[<FILE SPEC>]
The default extension on the file spec is TXT. The utility will simply
display the contents of a text file on the terminal, line for line.
The following is a section by section description of the LIST utility.
The first section of the source listing is a set of EQUATES which tell
the assembler where the various DOS routines reside in memory. These
equates represent the addresses given in this manual for "User Callable
DOS System Routines".
The next two sections are also equates, the first to the FMS entry
points, and the second references the system FCB. The actual program
finally starts with the ORG statement. In this program, we will make use
of the Utility Command space located at $A100, therefore, the ORG is to
$A100.
One of the conventions which should be observed when writing DOS
utilities is to always start the program with a BRA instruction.
Following this instruction should be a 'VN FCB 1' which defines the
version number of the utility. The 1 should of course be set to whatever
the actual version number is. In this example, the version number is 1.
This convention allows the FLEX VERSION Utility to correctly identify the
version number of a command.
Moving down the program to the label called 'LIST2', the program needs to
retrieve the file specification and get it into the FCB. Pointing X to
the FCB, we can make use of the DOS resident subroutine called 'GETFIL'
to automatically parse the file spec, check for errors, and set the name
in the FCB correctly. If all goes well in GETFIL, the carry should be
clear, otherwise there were errors in the file spec and this fact needs
reported. If the carry is set, control is passed to the line with the
label 'LIST9'. At this point, the error message is reported and control
is returned to FLEX.
If the file spec was correct, and the carry was clear after the return
from GETFIL, we want to set a default file name extension of TXT. The DOS
subroutine named SETEXT will do exactly that. First it is necessary

-47-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
to put the code for TXT in the A accumulator (the code is 1). X needs to
be pointing to the FCB which it still is. The '1' is also put in the FCB
for the future open operation. The call is made to SETEXT and the file
name is now correctly set up in the FCB. Note that no errors can be
generated by a call to SETEXT.
Now that we have the file spec, it is necessary to open the requested
file for read. X is still pointing to the FCB so it is not necessary to
reset. The FMS Function Code for 'open a file for read' is 1 which was
previously put in the FCB location 0. A call to FMS is now made in an
attempt to open the file. Upon return, if the Z-condition code is set,
there were no errors. If there was an error, the 'BNE LIST9' will take us
to the code to report the error. This section of code is the desired way
to handle most FMS caused disk errors. The first thing to do is call the
DOS routine RPTERR which will print the disk error message on the monitor
terminal. Next, all open disk files should be closed. This can be easily
accomplished by a call to the FMS close entry (FMSCLS). Finally, return
control back to DOS by jumping to the WARM START entry. If the file
opened successfully, control will be transferred to the line with the
label 'LIST4'. At this time it is desirable to fetch characters one at a
time from the file, printing them on the monitor terminal as they are
received. Since line feeds are not stored in text files (carriage returns
mark the end of lines, but the next line will follow immediately), each
carriage return received from the file is not output as is, but instead a
call to the DOS routine 'PCRLF' is made to print a carriage return and a
line feed. As each character is received from the file (by a call to FMS
at label LIST4), the error status is checked. If an error does occur,
control is transferred to "LIST6'. Since FLEX does not store an End of
File character with a file, the only mechanism for determining the end of
a file is by the End of File error generated by FMS. At 'LIST6', the
error status is checked to see if it is 8 (end of file status). If it is
not an 8, control is transferred to the error handling routine described
above. If it is an End of File, we are finished listing the file so it
must now be closed. The FMS Function Code for closing a file is 4. This
is loaded into A and stored in the FCB. Calling FMS will attempt to close
the file. Upon return, errors are checked, and if none found, control is
transferred back to DOS by the jump to 'WARMS'.
This example illustrates many of the methods used when writing utilities.
Many of the DOS and FMS routines were used. The basic idea of file
opening and closing were demonstrated, as well as file I/O. The methods
of dealing with various types of errors were also presented. Studying
this example until it is thoroughly understood will make writing your own
disk commands and disk oriented programs an easy task.

-48-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
*
* SIMPLE TEXT FILE LIST UTILITY
*
* COPYRIGHT (C) 1978 BY
*
* TECHNICAL SYSTEMS CONSULTANTS, INC.
* DOS EQUATES
AD03
AD2D
AD18
AD24
AD33
AD3F

WARMS
GETFIL
PUTCHR
PCRLF
SETEXT
RPTERR

EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU

$AD03
$AD2D
$AD18
$AD24
$AD33
$AD3F

DOS WARMS START ENTRY
GET FILE SPECIFICATION
PUT CHARACTER ROUTINE
PRINT CR & LF
SET DEFAULT NAME EXT
REPORT DISK ERROR

* FMS EQUATES
B406
B403

FMS
FMSCLS

EQU
EQU

$B406
$B403

* SYSTEM EQUATES
A840

FCB

EQU

$A840

SYSTEM FCB

* LIST UTILITY STARTS HERE
A100

ORG

$A100

A100 20 01

LIST

BRA

LIST2

GET AROUND TEMPS

A102 01

VN

FCB

1

VERSION NUMBER

A103 CE A8 40
A106 BD AD 2D
A109 25 34
A10B 86 01
A10D A7 00
A10F BD AD 33
A112 BD B4 06
A115 26 28
A117 CE A8 40
A11A BD B4 06
A11D 26 0E
A11F 81 0D
A121 26 05
A123 BD AD 24
A126 20 EF
A128 BD AD 18
A12B 20 EA

LIST2

LDX
JSR
BCS
LDA A
STA A
JSR
JSR
BNE
LDX
JSR
BNE
CMP A
BNE
JSR
BRA
JSR
BRA

#FCB
GETFIL
LIST9
#1
0,X
SETEXT
FMS
LIST9
#FCB
FMS
LIST6
#$D
LIST5
PCRLF
LIST4
PUTCHR
LIST4

POINT TO FCB
GET FILE SPEC
ANY ERRORS?
SET UP CODE
SAVE FOR READ OPEN
SET TXT EXTENSION
CALL FMS - DO OPEN
CHECK FOR ERROR
POINT TO FCB
CALL FMS - GET CHAR
ERRORS?
IS CHAR A CR?

LIST4

LIST5

-49-

OUTPUT CR & LF
REPEAT
OUTPUT THE CHARACTER
REPEAT SEQUENCE

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
A12D A6 01
A12F 81 08
A131 26 0C
A133 86 04
A135 A7 00
A137 BD B4 06
A13A 26 03
A13C 7E AD 03

LIST6

A13F BD AD 3F
A142 BD B4 03
A145 7E AD 03

LIST9

LDA A
CMP A
BNE
LDA A
STA A
JSR
BNE
JMP

1,X
#8
LIST9
#4
0,X
FMS
LIST9
WARMS

GET ERROR STATUS
IS IT EOF ERROR?

JSR
JSR
JMP

RPTERR
FMSCLS
WARMS

REPORT ERROR
CLOSE ALL FILES
RETURN TO FLEX

END

LIST

-50-

CLOSE FILE CODE
STORE IN FCB
CALL FMS - CLOSE FILE
ERRORS?
RETURN TO FLEX

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
THE DOS LINK UTILITY
The LINK Utility provided with FLEX is a special purpose command. Its
only function is to inform the "disk boot", which is on track 0, where
the program resides which is to be loaded during the boot operation.
Normally, LINK is used to set the pointer to the DOS program. Since DOS
may reside anywhere on the disk, LINK takes the starting disk address of
the file and stores it in a pointer in the boot sector. When the boot
program is later executed, it simply takes this disk address, and loads
the binary file which resides at that location. The load process is
terminated upon the receipt of a transfer address record. At this time,
control is transferred to the program just loaded by jumping to the
address specified in the transfer address record. If the 'linked' program
is ever moved on the disk, then it must be re-linked so the boot knows
the new disk address.
LINK may be used in some specialized applications. One is the development
of custom operating systems. The user may write his own operating system,
link it to the boot, and use it exactly as FLEX is used now. It may also
be desirable for special disks to boot in specialized programs rather
than the operating system. If this is done, remember that unless the DOS
is loaded during the boot process, there will not be any disk drivers or
File Management System resident in memory.

-51-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide

-52-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
PRINTER ROUTINES
There are two printer related programs provided with FLEX. One is the P
Utility, the other is the PRINT.SYS file which is the actual set of
printer drivers (initialize printer and output character). The P command
source listing is provided on the following pages and should be self
explanatory. Below you will find the requirements of the PRINT.SYS file.
No source listing is provided here since one is given in the "FLEX User's
Manual".
"PRINT.SYS' FILE REQUIREMENTS
The PRINT.SYS file needs to provide the system with three basic printer
routines, one for printer port initialization, one for printer status,
and one for output character to printer routine. The P routine and the
system printer spooler use these routines to communicate with the
printer. A source listing of the provided routines are included in the
"FLEX User's Manual" and will not be duplicated here. The three routines
and their requirements are listed here.
PINIT

($ACC0-ACD7) This routine should initialize the printer port.
No registers need preserved.

PCHK

($ACD8-ACE3) This routine should check to see if the printer can
accept another character. Return Negative CC status if can
accept, Plus if can not. Preserve A, B, and X.

POUT

($ACE4-ACF7) This routine should output the character in A after
calling PCHK to verify the printer can accept the character.
Preserve B and X.

THE SYSTEM PRINTER SPOOLER
FLEX contains a printer spooler module. It requires the installation of
an interval timer board for operation. Essentially, the spooler is a
multi-tasking system, with the output to printer function being a low
priority task. Any requested disk service will cause the printer task to
temporarily halt until the disk has been used. It should be noted that
the SWI CPU vector is adjusted in this task scheduler. The PRINT command
is used to activate the spooler which in turn prints the files (if any)
in the print queue. Exact details of the spooling operation are not
available at this time.

-53-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
*
* "P" UTILITY COMMAND
*
* THE P COMMAND INITIALIZES A PORT AND
* CHANGES THE OUTCH JUMP VECTOR IN FLEX
*
* COPYRIGHT (C) 1978 BY
*
* TECHNICAL SYSTEMS CONSULTANTS, INC.
* EQUATES
0010
A840
AD30
B406
B403
AD06
0004
AC09
AD1E
AD3F
AD03
AC11
AC02
ACC0
ACE4
AD0F
ACFC

INDEX
FCB
LOAD
FMS
FMSCLS
RENTER
NFER
PAUSE
PSTRNG
RPTERR
WARMS
LSTTRM
EOL
PINIT
POUT
OUTCH
PR1

A100

EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU
EQU

$0010
$A840
$AD30
$B406
$B403
$AD06
$4
$AC09
$AD1E
$AD3F
$AD03
$AC11
$AC02
$ACC0
$ACE4
$AD0F
$ACFC

ORG

$A100

A100 20 01

P

BRA

P1

BRANCH AROUND TEMPS

A102 01

VN

FCB

1

VERSION NUMBER

A103 B6 AC FC
A106 27 09
A108 CE A8 40
A10B C6 1B
A10D E7 01
A10F 20 43
A111 B6 AC 11
A114 81 0D
A116 27 45
A118 B1 AC 02
A11B 27 40
A11D 7F AC 09

P1

LDA A
BEQ
LDX
LDA B
STA B
BRA
LDA A
CMP A
BEQ
CMP A
BEQ
CLR

PR1
P12
#FCB
#27
1,X
P3
LSTTRM
#$D
P8
EOL
P8
PAUSE

CHECK SYSTEM PROCESS REG
IS IT BUSY?
POINT TO FCB
SET BUSY ERROR
STUFF IN FCB
GO REPORT ERROR
GET LAST TERMINATOR
IS IT A CR?

P12

- continued -

-54-

IS IT EOL CHARACTER
DISABLE THE PAUSE FEATURE

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
A120 B6 AC E4
A123 81 39
A125 26 13
A127 CE A8 40
A12A 86 01
A12C A7 00
A12E BD B4 06
A131 26 13
A133 86 FF
A135 A7 3B
A137 BD AD 30
A13A BD AC C0
A13D CE AC E4
A140 FF AD 10
A143 7E AD 06

P15

LDA A
CMP A
BNE
LDX
LDA A
STA A
JSR
BNE
LDA A
STA A
JSR
JSR
LDX
STX
JMP

POUT
#$39
P15
#FCB
#1
0,X
FMS
P2
#$FF
$3B,X
LOAD
PINIT
#POUT
OUTCH+1
RENTER

GET 1ST BYTE OF SPACE
IS IT RTS?
IF NOT - THEN LOADED
POINT TO FCB
OPEN FILE FOR READ

LDA A
CMP A
BNE
LDX
JSR
BRA

1,X
#NFER
P3
#NOPST
PSTRNG
P4

GET ERROR CODE
IS IT "NO SUCH FILE"?

CALL FMS
CHECK FOR ERRORS
SET FOR BINARY READ
SET COMPRESSION FLAG
CALL FLEX'S LOADER
GO INITIALIZE PORT
GET OUTPUT ADDRESS
STUFF IN FLEX
RETURN TO FLEX

A146 A6 01
A148 81 04
A14A 26 08
A14C CE A1 62
A14F BD AD 1E
A152 20 03

P2

A154 BD AD 3F
A157 BD B4 03
A15A 7E AD 03

P3
P4

JSR
JSR
JMP

RPTERR
FMSCLS
WARMS

REPORT ERROR
CLOSE ALL FILES
RETURN TO FLEX

A15D CE A1 78
A160 20 ED

P8

LDX
BRA

#ERSTR
P25

POINT TO STRING
GO PRINT IT

A162 22
A177 04
A178 22
A199 04

NOPST

FCC
FCB
FCC
FCB

'"PRINT.SYS" NOT FOUND'
4
'"P" MUST BE FOLLOWED BY A COMMAND'
4

P25

ERSTR

POINT TO MESSAGE
GO PRINT IT

* THE FOLLOWING CODE IS LOADED INTO
* THE SYSTEM FCB WHEN THE P COMMAND IS
* LOADED INTO MEMORY.
* IT PRESETS THE FILE NAME IN THE FCB.
A843

ORG

$A843

A843 FF
A844 50
A849 00
A84C 53

FCB
FCC
FCB
FCC

$FF
'PRINT'
0,0,0
'SYS'

END

P

-55-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide

-56-

FLEX Advanced Programmer's Guide
INTERRUPTS IN FLEX
FLEX makes extensive use of interrupts during printer spooling. Anytime
there are files in the PRINT Queue (as a result of using the PRINT
command) the timer is activated (MP-T board in I/O slot #4 -in SWTPc
compatible systems). This timer is initialized to output interrupts every
10 milliseconds. These are IRQ type interrupts and FLEX sets the IRQ
vector to point to its IRQ routine. When the PRINT Queue is empty, the
timer is shut off and no interrupts are generated. The SWI instruction
is also used quite extensively in FLEX. The SWI vector in RAM is set by
FLEX to point to its SWI routine. Because of the SWI and IRQ use, the MON
command will not permit leaving FLEX while there is a file in the PRINT
Queue.
All FLEX utilities, the Editor, the Assembler, the Text Processor, and
BASIC are interruptable programs. When writing your own programs, if they
are to be used while printing with the PRINT command (files in the print
queue), they should be written to be interruptable as well. At no time
should the IRQ or SWI vectors be changed in a utility which is to be run
while printing. In general, good programming practice will yield
interruptable programs.

SYSTEM MEMORY MAP
The following memory map shows the location of user RAM and several major
sections of the FLEX operating system. All addresses are in hexadecimal.
ADDRESS

DESCRIPTION

0000 - 7FFF

User RAM (Some of the lower end of this area is used
by certain utilities such as NEWDISK.)
Stack Area (SP is initialized to A07F)
Input Buffer
Utility Command Area
Scheduler & Printer Spooler
System FCB
System Files Area
DOS
FMS
Disk Drivers

A000 - A07F
A080 - A0FF
A100 - A6FF
A700 - A83F
A840 - A97F
A980 - ABFF
AC00 - B3FF
B400 - BE7F
BE80 - BFFF

-57-

